content/blog/announcing-crxn-dn42-interconnect.md, before:

---
title: Announcing the CRXNxDN42 inter-connect!
author: Tristan B. Velloza Kildaire
date: 2022-12-08
draft: true
---

{{<bruh>}}
<br>
<center>
    <img src="/crxn_dn42_interconnect/logo.png" width=80%></img>
</center>
{{</bruh>}}

The _Community Run eXpansive Network_ or [CRXN](/projects/crxn) has been a project of mine that started way back when in 2021 during the rather annoying lockdown period of the pandemic. The upside to this period was I had a lot of time to really work on my passion projects which had included IP routing and networking, the result of a lot of toying around with static routing, then dynamic routing with the reference implementation of babel, `babeld`, and then finally arriving at the current day where we run everything with the _BIRD Internet Routing Daemon_ or (BIRD for short `;)`). It's been a journey of a lot of work over time to create a network that wasn't just fun for myself but for many others. Amounting to something I use daily to get a lot of my work and communications done as well.

## Major announcement

It's therefore with great pleasure that I am announcing the interconnection of CRXN with [dn42](https://dn42.dev/Home) - a project which is originally an idea proposed by [Ty3r0x](https://chaox.ro) and which became spearheaded by him and [Marek Küthe](https://mk16.de/). I want to thank you two both for yhe time and effort put into this process, along with the whole dn42 team for making this inter-connect possible.

With such an experiment we are bound to have a symbiotic relationship between both projects - benefitting from each other's networks!

Commit message:

New blog post out 🎆️: Announcing the CRXNxDN42 inter-connect!

content/blog/announcing-crxn-dn42-interconnect.md, after:

---
title: Announcing the CRXNxDN42 inter-connect!
author: Tristan B. Velloza Kildaire
date: 2023-01-31
---

{{<bruh>}}
<br>
<center>
    <img src="/crxn_dn42_interconnect/logo.png" width=80%></img>
</center>
{{</bruh>}}

The _Community Run eXpansive Network_ or [CRXN](/projects/crxn) has been a project of mine that started way back when in 2021 during the rather annoying lockdown period of the pandemic. The upside to this period was I had a lot of time to really work on my passion projects which had included IP routing and networking, the result of a lot of toying around with static routing, then dynamic routing with the reference implementation of babel, `babeld`, and then finally arriving at the current day where we run everything with the _BIRD Internet Routing Daemon_ or (BIRD for short `;)`). It's been a journey of a lot of work over time to create a network that wasn't just fun for myself but for many others. Amounting to something I use daily to get a lot of my work and communications done as well.

## Major announcement

It's therefore with great pleasure that I am announcing the interconnection of CRXN with [dn42](https://dn42.dev/Home) - a project which is originally an idea proposed by [Ty3r0x](https://chaox.ro) and which became spearheaded by him and [Marek Küthe](https://mk16.de/). I want to thank you two both for yhe time and effort put into this process, along with the whole dn42 team for making this inter-connect possible. You can read more about the intricacies on Marek Küthe's [blog post](https://mk16.de/blog/the-crxn-dn42-interconnection-is-up/).


With such an experiment we are bound to have a symbiotic relationship between both projects - benefitting from each other's networks!
