content/blog/new_eventy_goals.md, before:

---
title: New goals for Eventy
author: Tristan B. V. Kildaire
date: 2021-10-23
draft: true
---

# The current state

The goals have shifted for Eventy. What started off as what I have now figured out is referred to _"signals and slots"_ which is effectively to say that you associate a _input signal_ like `push(Event)` where `e.id` maybe is equal to `8`, and you associate that
number `8` with a _slot_ that handles anything of _"type"_ `8`. Given 5 events being pushed into such a system we then end with `5+1` threads, the `+1` accounting for the caller main thread and the other 5 being the handlers that were dispatched for the respective slot(s). This is effcetively what the v.0.4.x series of Eventy does now.

Previosuly, the inefficient mechanism of an event-loop and queue was used but this wasn't a sleeping loop but rather a yielding loop. Which meant it would run rather often even when it didn't need to. What would have been better would be the use of `sleep()` (indeffinately)
and then signalling that process to wake it up. Some precautions, as I have now read, would probably need to be taken into account. Such would be checking the received signal and if it matches the one we expect - sometimes the kernel can send us signals like when a thread leader quits (or something I believe) - I am still learning (never used `clone()` with `CLONE_THREAD` a lot, normally just used `CLONE_VM` and maybe or'd that with `CLONE_FILES` (or whichever of that of `_FD` it was)). This would have been a better solution and could have allowed us to add some priorities to events. Yes, we would slow down all execution by having no immediate dispatch but the playing field would have been evened out then, _however_ we would have gaine dthe ability the prioritise certain dispatches potentially _or_ have low priority events that could be dispatched way later on.

# The future

The next section discusses the ideas I would like toimplement into Eventy.

## Promises

The idea of promises is rather simple. WHen you make a call to `push(Event e)` you will get a `Promise` object returned instead of the method being a `void push(Event)` as it stands today. This `Promise` object will then have the following methods which are of interest to us:

1. `await(int timeout = 0)`
    * The default timeout being `0` implies block-forever
2. `then(Event e)`

### `await()`

We could write a program as follows:

```d
// Create a promise
Promise promise = engine.push(new Event(1));
```

Then later on we could provide this _Promise_ `promise` to maybe let's say two threads **T1** and **T2** and both of them could call the method `await()` as follows:

---

###### Thread 1

```d
promise.await()
```

###### Thread 2

```d
promise.await()
```

---

Commit message:

Draft: Added notes on implementation of the `await()` method

content/blog/new_eventy_goals.md, after:

---
title: New goals for Eventy
author: Tristan B. V. Kildaire
date: 2021-10-23
draft: true
---

# The current state

The goals have shifted for Eventy. What started off as what I have now figured out is referred to _"signals and slots"_ which is effectively to say that you associate a _input signal_ like `push(Event)` where `e.id` maybe is equal to `8`, and you associate that
number `8` with a _slot_ that handles anything of _"type"_ `8`. Given 5 events being pushed into such a system we then end with `5+1` threads, the `+1` accounting for the caller main thread and the other 5 being the handlers that were dispatched for the respective slot(s). This is effcetively what the v.0.4.x series of Eventy does now.

Previosuly, the inefficient mechanism of an event-loop and queue was used but this wasn't a sleeping loop but rather a yielding loop. Which meant it would run rather often even when it didn't need to. What would have been better would be the use of `sleep()` (indeffinately)
and then signalling that process to wake it up. Some precautions, as I have now read, would probably need to be taken into account. Such would be checking the received signal and if it matches the one we expect - sometimes the kernel can send us signals like when a thread leader quits (or something I believe) - I am still learning (never used `clone()` with `CLONE_THREAD` a lot, normally just used `CLONE_VM` and maybe or'd that with `CLONE_FILES` (or whichever of that of `_FD` it was)). This would have been a better solution and could have allowed us to add some priorities to events. Yes, we would slow down all execution by having no immediate dispatch but the playing field would have been evened out then, _however_ we would have gaine dthe ability the prioritise certain dispatches potentially _or_ have low priority events that could be dispatched way later on.

# What we want

The next section discusses the ideas I would like toimplement into Eventy.

## Promises

The idea of promises is rather simple. WHen you make a call to `push(Event e)` you will get a `Promise` object returned instead of the method being a `void push(Event)` as it stands today. This `Promise` object will then have the following methods which are of interest to us:

1. `await(int timeout = 0)`
    * The default timeout being `0` implies block-forever
2. `then(Event e)`

### `await()`

We could write a program as follows:

```d
// Create a promise
Promise promise = engine.push(new Event(1));
```

Then later on we could provide this _Promise_ `promise` to maybe let's say two threads **T1** and **T2** and both of them could call the method `await()` as follows:

---

###### Thread 1

```d
promise.await()
```

###### Thread 2

```d
promise.await()
```

---

This would then block on bith **T1** and **T2** until the signal handler registered for events of type `1` (recall our `new Event(1)`)
finishes.

# Implementation

This section goes into the details about the implementation of such a feature.

## Promises

### Implementation of `await()`

In order to accomplish such a mechanism with the `await()` feature we would need to track a few things. Firstly, when `push(Event e)`
is called we need to immediately create a `Promise` object that is associated with that Event `e`.

When it comes to the calls to `await()` on multiple threads, such as our example with **T1** and **T2**, we will need to, via the `Promise` class somehow access the `Engine` class. This can be accomplished by a private non-static (staic could be done but that might only allow a single Eventy instance then - I would rather keep everything self-contained) field that gets passed into the
`Promise` constructor. This also indicates we should make the constructor private, such that only Eventy's `push(Event e)` can initialize a new `Promise` object. **The reason** for this is because we need to actually queue up a tuple of `(Promise, tid)` in
the Engine such that when the signal handler completes it can send a signal to the matching promises, i.e. the ones where for-every tuple in the queue we have `tuple[0].e == dispatcher.e` (i.e. matching event), then we extratc the `tid` or _thread-id_ and we can
use something like `pthread_sigqueue()` to signal and wake-up the sleeping **t1** and **T2** in their `await()` calls.
